Pandu, a wealthy jeweller of the Brahman caste, was travelling with a servant in a carriage on some lucrative business to Varanasi, and overtaking on his way a monk of venerable appearance who was walking in the same direction, he thought to himself; ' This shramana' looks noble and saintly, Companionship with good men brings luck; should he also be going to Varanasi, I will invite him to ride with me in my carriage." Having saluted the shramana he told him whither he was driving and at what inn he intended to stay in Varanasi. Learning that the shramana, whose name was Narada, also was travelling to Varanasi, he asked him to accept a seat in his carriage. 'I am obliged to you for your kindness," said the shramana to the Brahman, for I am quite worn out by the long journey. Having no possessions in this world, I cannot repay you in money; but it may happen that I can reward you with some spiritual treasure out of the wealth of the information I have received while following Shakyamuni, the Blessed One, the Great Buddha, the Teacher of mankind." Both travelled together in the carriage and Pandu listened with pleasure to the instructive discourse of Narada. After about an hour's journey, they came to a place where the road had become almost impassable by a washout caused by a recent rain, and a farmer's cart with a broken wheel prevented further progress. Dévala, the owner of the cart, was on his way to Varanasi to sell his rice, and was anxious to reach the town before the dawn of the next morning. If he was delayed a day or two longer, the rice merchants might have left town or bought all the stock they needed. When the jeweller saw that he could not proceed on his way unless the farmer's cart was removed, he began to grow angry and ordered Mahadata, his slave, to push the cart aside, so that his carriage could pass by. The farmer remonstrated because it being so near the slope of the road, it would jeopardise his cargo; but the Brahman would not listen to the farmer and bade his servant overturn the rice cart and push it aside. Mahaduta, an unusually strong man who seemed to take delight in the injury of others, obeyed before the shramana could interfere. When Pandu was about to continue his travel the shramana jumped out of the carriage and said: 'Excuse me, sir, for leaving you here. I am under obligations for your kindness in giving me an hour's ride in your carriage. I was tired when you picked me up on the road, but now thanks to your courtesy, I am rested, and recognising in this farmer an incarnation of one of your ancestors I cannot repay your kindness better than by assisting him in his troubles." The Brahman looked at the shramana in amazement: "That farmer, you say, is an incarnation of one of my ancestors? That is impossible." "I know," replied the shramana, "that you are not aware of the numerous important relations which tie your fate to that of the farmer. But the blind man cannot be expected to see; so I regret that you do harm to yourself and I shall try to protect you against the wounds which you are about to inflict upon yourself." The wealthy merchant was not accustomed to be reprimanded, and feeling that the words of the shramana, although uttered with great kindness, contained a stinging reproach, bade his servant drive on without further delay. The shramana saluted Dévala, the farmer, and began to help him repair his cart and load up the rice, part of which had been thrown out. The work proceeded quickly and Dévala thought: "This shramana must be a holy man; invisible devas seem to assist him, I will ask him how I deserved the ill treatment at the hands of the proud Brahman." And he said: "Venerable sir, can you tell me why I suffer an injustice from a man to whom I have never done any harm?" And the shramana said: "My dear friend, you do not suffer an injustice, but only receive in your present state of existence the same treatment which you visited upon the jeweller in a former life, and if I am not mistaken in reading the thoughts of your mind, I should say that you would, even to-day, have done the same unto the jeweller if he had been in your place, and if you had had such a strong slave at your command as he has, able to deal with you at his pleasure." The farmer confessed that if he had had the power, he would have felt little compunction in treating another man who had happened to impede his way as he had been treated by the Brahman, but thinking of the retribution attendant upon unkind deeds, he resolved to be more considerate in the future with his fellow beings. 