Years have passed. The convent of Kolshambi, founded by Pandou, the jeweller, has become a point where sages meet, and is celebrated as the important centre of science and scientific studies. One day the king of an adjacent country, having heard of the perfection of the jewelry fabricated by Pandou, sent to him his treasurer to order a crown of massive gold, enriched with the most costly stones of India. When Pandou had achieved the task, he set out for the capital of the king, and in the hope of securing further business, he took with him a 'great quantity of gold. The caravan which bore these riches was accompanied by armed men. Nevertheless, when it arrived in the mountainous region, a band of brigands under Madagouta, their chief, attacked the caravan, massacred the escort, and took possession of the treasures. Pandou himself escaped only by the merest chance. This loss made an enormous breach in the fortune of the jeweller. He was much affected thereby, but supported his misfortune with resignation. "I have merited this trial," he thought, "by the sins of my past life. In my youth I was hard upon the people, and I should not complain at reaping to-day the fruit of my bad actions." Now Pandou had become more kindly disposed towards his fellow-creatures, and his misfortunes only accomplished the purification of his heart. Years again went by, and it came to pass that Pantaka, a young monk - a disciple of Narada - while traveling in the mountains of Kolshambi, fell into the hands of brigands. As he possessed nothing, the chief of the brigands released him after having caused him to be beaten. The following morning, Pantaka, in passing through the forest heard the noise of a conflict. He went in the direction of the combatants and beheld a large number of brigands, who were madly attacking their chief, Madagouta. As a lion surrounded by dogs, the latter held his own, and had already killed several. But they were too numerous, and finally Madagouta was vanquished and fell covered with wounds. As soon as the brigands had gone, the young monk approached the wounded men, in order to give them aid; but all were dead. Madagouta alone showed signs of life. The monk ran quickly to a little stream which ran by, filled his cruche with water, and carried it to the dying man. Madagouta opened his eyes and said, whilst gritting his teeth: "Where are the ungrateful dogs whom I have led so many times to the chase? Without me they will soon be lost like jackals tracked by hunters." "Think no more of your companions, the accomplices of your criminal life," said Pantaka. 'Think rather of your last hour, of the salvation of your soul. Drink this water, and let me dress your wounds; perhaps I may still save your life." "It is useless," replied Madagouta, "I am lost - the miserable wretches have wounded me unto death. Oh! the cowards! Oh! the ungrateful dogs! They have stricken me down with the blows which I myself have taught them." "You reap that which you have sown. Had you taught the good to your companions, good you would have received. You taught them to murder, and thus you have been killed by their hands." "You are right," replied the brigand chief. "I have merited my fate, but it must be terrible, if it is necessary to reap in the life to come the fruit of all my bad actions! Teach me then, O holy man, that which I should do in order to lighten the weight of sins which oppress my breast like unto a rock." "Pluck from your heart your desires of vengeance; stifle your wicked passions, and fill your soul with love of all your fellowmen." "I have done much evil and no good. How may I escape this net of woe which I have woven for myself, of my own wicked instincts? My Karma will conduct me to hell, for I can never find the way of salvation." "Yes, it is true," said the monk. "Your Karma will gather in your future incarnation the fruit of the grains which you have sown. He who has committed bad actions cannot avoid the consequences. But do not despair; every man can be saved upon condition that he make the sacrifice of his own individuality. 
