The rice was soon collected and placed in the wagon, and the monk and the peasant went on their way to Benares. They were not far from the city when the horse shied. "A serpent! a serpent!" cried out the peasant. The monk looked attentively at the object which had frightened the horse, left the wagon and picked up a purse filled with gold. "This purse can only have been lost by the rich jeweller," thought he, and he gave it to the peasant, saying: "Take this purse, and when you have come to Benares, go to the hotel which I will show you, and give him his money. Pandou will beg you to excuse the rude action which he committed against you, and you will say to him that you have pardoned him, and that you wish him success in all his enterprises; for, believe me, the greater his success, the better it will be for you. Your destiny depends in many ways upon his." Meanwhile Pandou arrived at Benares and met the rich banker, Malmek, with whom he had business relations. "I am lost," said Malmek to him, "if I cannot purchase a wagon-load of the best rice for the royal cuisine. There is at Benares a banker, my implacable enemy, who, having learned that I had made a contract to deliver this morning to the royal major-domo a wagon-load of rice, purchased all there was of the article in the market. The major-domo will not free me from my engagement, and I am lost if Krichna does not send me an angel from heaven to my aid." Whilst Malmek was recounting his mis fortune, Pandou perceived that he had lost his purse. After having searched the vehicle in vain in quest of it, he decided that his slave Madagouta had taken it. He called the police and charged the slave with the theft. Thereupon Madagouta was seized, bound, and tortured, in order to extract from him a confession. "I am not guilty, let me go," cried the poor slave. "I cannot support such torture! I am innocent, and suffer for the crime of others. Oh! if I could obtain the pardon of the peasant upon whom I inflicted so much trouble in order to please my master! This is indeed the just punishment of my cruelty." The police continued to beat the slave, and meanwhile Devala, the peasant, approached the hotel, and to the great astonishment of all handed the lost purse to Pandou. The slave was quickly delivered from the hands of his executioners, but, angered against his master, he fled to the mountains and joined a band of brigands. Malmek, learning in turn that the peasant could sell him rice, and of the best quality, hastened to purchase the entire wagon-load, paying him a triple price; and Pandou, happy to have found his money, hastened to the convent to demand of the monk the explanation promised him. Narada the Monk said to him: "I would have given you the explanation which you desired, but knowing that you are incapable of comprehending the truth, I prefer to say nothing to you except to give this counsel: Treat every man whom you meet as you would be treated yourself ; serve him as you would wish to be served; thus you will sow the seed of good actions and the harvest will profit you, also." "O monk; give me the explanation," said Pandou, "and it will be more easy to follow your counsel." "Very well, then listen," replied the monk. "I will give you the key to the mystery: if you cannot penetrate it, believe that which I tell you. To consider one's self an isolated being is an illusion, and he who directs all his thoughts to accomplish the will of that isolated being follows a false route which will conduct him into the abyss of sin. If we consider ourselves as isolated beings, it is because the veil of Maya blinds our eyes, preventing us from seeing the indissoluble ties which bind us to our neighbors, and from finding our communion with the souls of other beings. Few men know this truth. May the following maxims be your talisman: 'He who harms others, harms himself.' 'He who aids others, does good to himself.' 'Cease to consider yourself an isolated being, and you will find the road to the truth.' For him whose sight is obscured by the veil of Maya the world seems divided into innumerable individualities, and sucha man cannot understand the extent of universal love for every living creature." Pandou replied: 'Your words have a profound signification, and I will remember them. I have extended a little courtesy, which cost me nothing, to a poor monk during his journey to Benares, and behold the blessed results which have come to me. I owe you much, for without you, not only should I have lost my purse, but it would have been impossible to negotiate at Benares the affairs which have notably increased my fortune. Besides, it is due to you that the wagon of rice arrived in time to save my friend Malmek. If all men understood the truth of your precepts, how much better would be our world! how much evil actions would be diminished and universal happiness promoted! I would that the truths of Buddha might be understood by all; for this reason, I wish to found a convent in my country of Kolshambi, and I pray you to aid me in establishing there a retreat for the fraternity of the disciples of Buddha."
