Madagouta remained some moments in silence as if to collect his thoughts, and then said: "Listen to me attentively. I wish to avow everything. I was the slave of Pandou, jeweller of Kolshambi. But after he had unjustly tortured me, I fled, and became the chief of brigands. Some time ago I learned by my scouts that he would cross the mountains. I surprised him and took from him the greater part of his fortune. Go and tell him that I forgive him, with all my heart, the evil which he has unjustly done me, and that I beg him to forgive me for having robbed him. When I was in his service his heart was as hard as stone, and it was from him I learned to think only of self. I have heard that he has become a better man and that he is now cited as a model of goodness and of justice. I do not wish to remain his debtor; therefore I pray you to say to him that I have preserved buried in a subterranean hiding-place the crown of gold which he made for the king; also all of his treasure. Only two brigands knew of this hiding place and the two were killed to-day. Let Pandou accompanied by armed men come and take possession of the goods which I have taken from him." And Madagouta died in the arms of Pantaka, after having indicated to him where he could find the hidden treasure. The young monk then hastened to Kolshambi, where he found the jeweller and told him of what had taken place in the forest. Pandou discovered the hiding-place and recovered all the riches which the chief of the brigands had hidden there. He caused Madagouta and the slain brigands to be buried; and Pantaka, commentating over their graves upon the words of Buddha, said : " Individuality causes evil, and it is individuality which suffers." "Individuality avoids evil and individuality purifies itself." "Purity and impurity belong to individuality; no one can purify another. Man himself should make the effort; the Buddhas are only the educators." Pandou took back to Kolshambi all his riches; and in the enjoyment, with moderation, of his recovered fortune he passed the rest of his life in calmness and happiness. When, at an advanced age, he was about to die, he collected around him his children.and grand-children, and said to them : "My dear children, do not accuse others of your want of success; seek the cause of your misfortunes in yourselves, and if you are not blinded by vanity, you will find it, and you will learn thus to avoid the evil. The remedy of your misfortunes is in yourselves. Never let the regard of your conscience be veiled by the veil of Maya. Remember the words which were the talisman of my life: 'He who causes his neighbor to suffer works ill to himself.' 'He who aids others, aids himself.' 'Let the error of individuality disappear, and you will then walk in the path of justice.'"