KARMA.

 

A TALE WITH A MORAL.

 

Pandu, a wealthy jeweller of the Brahman caste,
was travelling with a servant in a carriage on some
lucrative business to Vârânasî, and overtaking on his
way a monk of venerable appearance who was walking
in the same direction, he thought to himself: "This
shramana looks noble and saintly. Companionship
with good men brings luck; should he also be going
to Vârânasî, I will invite him to ride with me in my
carriage.” Having saluted the shramana he told him
whither he was driving and at what inn he intended
to stay in Vârânasî. Learning that the shramana, whose
name was Nârada, also was travelling to Vârânasî, he
asked him to accept a seat in his carriage. "I am
obliged to you for your kindness,” said the shramana
to the Brahman, for I am quite worn out by the long
journey. Having no possessions in this world, I cannot 
repay you in money; but it may happen that I can
reward you with some spiritual treasure out of the
wealth of the information I have received while following 
Shâkyamuni, the Blessed One, the Great Buddha, 
the Teacher of mankind.”

Both travelled together in the carriage and Pandu
listened with pleasure to the instructive discourse of
Nârada. After about an hour’s journey, they came to
a place where the road had become almost impassable
by a washout caused by a recent rain, and a farmer's
cart with a broken wheel prevented further progress.
Dêvala, the owner of the cart, was on his way to Vârânasî
to sell his rice, and was anxious to reach the
town before the dawn of the next morning. If he was
delayed a day or two longer, the rice merchants might
have left town or bought all the stock they needed.

When the jeweller saw that he could not proceed
on his way unless the farmer’s cart was removed, he
began to grow angry and ordered Mahâdata, his slave,
to push the cart aside, so that his carriage could pass
by. The farmer remonstrated because it being so near
the slope of the road, it would jeopardise his cargo;
but the Brahman would not listen to the farmer and
bade his servant overturn the rice cart and push it
aside. Mahâduta, an unusually strong man who seemed
to take delight in the injury of others, obeyed before
the shramana could interfere. When Pandu was about
to continue his travel the shramana jumped out of the
carriage and said: "Excuse me, sir, for leaving you
here. I am under obligations for your kindness in
giving me an hour’s ride in your carriage. I was tired
when you picked me up on the road, but now thanks
to your courtesy, I am rested, and recognising in this
farmer an incarnation of one of your ancestors I cannot 
repay your kindness better than by assisting him
in his troubles.”

The Brahman looked at the shramana in amaze-
ment: "That farmer, you say, is an incarnation of
one of my ancestors? That is impossible.”

“I know,” replied the shramana, "that you are
not aware of the numerous important relations which
tie your fate to that of the farmer. But the blind man
cannot be expected to see; so I regret that you do
harm to yourself and I shall try to protect you against
the wounds which you are about to inflict upon yourself.”

The wealthy merchant was not accustomed to be
reprimanded, and feeling that the words of the shramana,
although uttered with great kindness, contained
a stinging reproach, bade his servant drive on without
further delay.

The shramana saluted Dêvala, the farmer, and be-
gan to help him repair his cart and load up the rice,
part of which had been thrown out. The work pro-
ceeded quickly and Dêvala thought: "This shramana
must be a holy man; invisible devas seem to assist
him. I will ask him how I deserved the ill treatment
at the hands of the proud Brahman.” And he said:
"Venerable sir, can you tell me why | suffer an injustice 
from a man to whom I have never done any harm?”
And the shramana said: "My dear friend, you do not
suffer an injustice, but only receive in your present
state of existence the same treatment which you visited
upon the jeweller in a former life, and if I am not mistaken 
in reading the thoughts of your mind, I should
say that you would, even to-day, have done the same
unto the jeweller if he had been in your place, and if
you had had such a strong slave at your command as
he has, able to deal with you at his pleasure.”

The farmer confessed that if he had had the power,
he would have felt little compunction in treating another 
man who had happened to impede his way as
he had been treated by the Brahman, but thinking of
the retribution attendant upon unkind deeds, he resolved 
to be more considerate in the future with his
fellow beings.

The rice was loaded and both travelled on to Vârânasî,
when all of a sudden the horse jumped aside.
"A snake, a snake!” shouted the farmer. But the
shramana looked closely at the object at which the
horse shuddered, jumped out of the cart and saw that
it was a purse full of gold, and the idea struck him:
"No one else but the wealthy jeweller can have lost
this purse.” He took the purse and handing it to the
farmer said: "Take this purse and when you come to
Vârânasî drive up to the inn which I shall point out to
you; ask for Pandu, the Brahman, and deliver the purse.
He will excuse himself for the rudeness with which
he treated you, but te]l him that you have forgiven
him and wish him success in all his undertakings.
For, let me tell you, the more successful he is, the
better you will prosper; your fate depends in many
respects upon his fate. Should the jeweller demand
any explanation, send him to the vihâra where he shall
find me ready to assist him with advice in case he may
feel the need of it."

Pandu in the meantime arrived at Vârânasî and
met Mallika, his business-friend, a rich banker, "I
am a ruined man," said Mallika, "and can do no business
with you, unless I can buy a cart of the best rice
for the king’s table. There is a rival banker in Vârânasî
who learning that I had made a contract with the
royal treasurer to deliver the rice to-morrow morning,
and being desirous to bring about my destruction, has
bought up all the rice in Vârânasî. The royal treasurer
must have received a bribe, for he will not release me
from my contract and to-morrow I shall be a ruined
man unless Krishna will send an angel from heaven to
help me.”

While Mallika was still lamenting the poverty to
which his rival would reduce him, Pandu missed his
purse. Searching his carriage without being able to
find it, he suspected his slave Mahâduta; and calling
the police accused him of theft, and had him bound
and cruelly tortured to extort a confession. The slave
in his agonies cried: "I am innocent, let me go, for I
cannot stand this pain; I am quite innocent at least
of this crime, and suffer now for other sins. O, that
I could beg the farmer's pardon whom, far the sake of
my master, I wronged without any cause! This torture, 
I believe, is a punishment for my rudeness.”

While the police officer was still applying the lash
to the back of the slave, the farmer arrived at the inn,
and, to the great astonishment of all concerned, delivered
the purse. The slave was at once released
from the hands of his torturer. But being dissatisfied
with his master, he secretly left and joined a band of
robbers in the mountains, who made him their chief
on account of his great strength and courage. When
Mallika heard that the farmer had the best rice to
sell, fit for delivery to the royal table, he bought at
once the whole car-load for treble the price that the
farmer had ever received, and Pandu, glad at heart to
have his money restored, hastened at once to the vihâra 
to receive further explanations from Nârada, the
shramana.

Nârada said: “I might give thee an explanation,
but knowing that thou art unable to understand a
spiritual truth, I prefer to remain silent. However, I
shall give thee some advice: Treat every man whom
thou meetest as thy own self; serve him as thou
wouldst demand to be served thyself; for thus thou
shalt sow a sowing of good deeds, the rich harvest of
which thou wilt not fail to reap.”

"Give me, O shramana, the explanation,” said the
jeweller, "and I shall thereby be better able to follow
your advice.”

The shramana said: "Listen then, I will give you
the key to the mystery. If you do not understand it,
have faith in what I say. Self is an illusion, and he
whose mind is bent upon following self, follows an
ignis fatuus which leads him into the quagmire of sin.
The illusion of self is the veil of Mâyâ that blinds your
eyes and prevents you from recognising the close relations
that obtain between yourself and your fellows,
and from tracing the identity of your self in the souls
of other beings. Ignorance is the source of sin. There
are few who know the truth. Let this motto be your
talisman :

‘He who hurts others injures himself.

“He who helps others advances his own interests.

‘Let the delusion of self disappear from your mind.
And you will naturally walk in the path of truth.

'To him whose vision is dimmed by the veil of
Mâyâ, the spiritual world appears to be cut up into
innumerable selves. Thus he will be puzzled in many
ways concerning the transmigration of soul-life, and
will be incapable of understanding the import of an all-
comprehensive kindness toward all living beings.’ ”

The jeweller replied: "Your words, O venerable
sir, have a deep significance and I shall bear them in
mind. I extended a small kindness which caused me
no expense whatever to a poor shramana on my way
to Vârânasî, and lo! how propitious has been the result!
I am deeply in your debt, for without you I
should not only have lost my purse, but would have
been prevented from doing business in Vârânasî which
greatly increased my wealth, while if it had been left
undone it might have reduced me to a state of wretched
poverty. In addition, your thoughtfulness and the
arrival of the farmer’s rice-cart preserved the prosper-
ity of my friend Mallika, the banker. If all men saw
the truth of your maxims, how much better the world
would be, how greatly evils would be lessened, and
public welfare enhanced! As I am anxious to let the
truth of buddha be understood, I shall found a vihâra
at my native place, Kaushambî, and invite you to visit
me so that I may dedicate the place to the brother-
hood of Buddha's disciples.”

Years passed on and Pandu’s vihâra at Kaushambî
became a place in which wise shramanas used to stay
and it was renowned as a centre of enlightenment for
the people of the town.

At that time the king of a neighboring country had
heard of the beauty of Pandu’s jewelry, and he sent
his treasurer to order a royal diadem wrought in pure
gold and set with the most precious stones of India.
When Pandu had finished the work, he started for the
residence of the king, and as he expected to transact
other profitable business, took with him a great store
of gold pieces. The caravan carrying his goods was
protected by a strong escort of armed men, but when
they reached the mountains they were attacked by a
band of robbers lead by Mahâduta, who beat them
and took away all the jewelry and the gold, and Pandu
escaped with great difficulty. This misfortune was a
blow to Pandu’s prosperity, and as he suffered some
other severe losses, his wealth was much reduced.

Pandu was much distressed, but he bore his misfortunes
without complaint, thinking to himself: "I
have deserved these losses for the sins committed in
my past existence. In my younger years I was very
hard on other people; when I now reap the harvest of
my evil deeds I have no cause for complaint.” As he
had grown in kindliness toward all beings, his misfortunes
only served to purify his heart ; and his chief
regret, when thinking of his reduced means, was that
he had become unable to do good and to help his
friends in the vihâra to spread the truths of religion.

Again years passed on and it happened that Panthaka,
a young shramana and a disciple of Nârada, was
travelling through the mountains of Kaushambî, and
he fell among the robbers in the mountains. As he
had nothing in his possession, the robber-chief beat
him severely and let him go. On the next morning
Panthaka, while pursuing his way through the woods,
heard a noise as of quarrelling and fighting men, and
going to the place he saw a number of robbers, all of
them in a great rage, and in their midst stood Mahaduta,
their chief ; and the chief was desperately fight-
ing them, like a lion surrounded by hounds, and he
slew several of his aggressors with formidable blows,
but there were too many against one! at last he succumbed
and fell to the ground as if dead, covered
with fatal wounds. As soon as the robbers had left
the place the young shramana approached to see
whether he could be of any assistance to the wounded
men. He found that all the robbers were dead, and
there was only a little life left in the chief. He at
once went down to the little brooklet which was murmuring
near by, fetched fresh water in his bowl and
brought it to the dying man. Mahâduta opened his
eyes and, gnashing his teeth, said: "Where are those
ungrateful dogs whom I have led to victory and success? 
Without me as their chief they will soon perish
like jackals hunted down by skilful hunters.”

"Do not think of your comrades, the companions
of your sinful life,” said Panthaka, ‘but think of your
soul and accept in the last moment the chance of salvation
that is offered you. Here is water to drink,
and let me dress your wounds; perhaps I may save
your life.”

‘Alas! alas!" replied Mahâduta, are you not the
man whom I beat but yesterday and now you come to
my assistance, to assuage my pain? You bring me
fresh water to quench my thirst, and try to save my
life ! It is useless, honorable sir, I am a doomed man.
‘The churls have wounded me unto death—the ungrateful cowards! 
They have dealt me the blows which I taught them.”

"You reap what you have-sown;” continued the
shramana, "had you taught your comrades acts of
kindness, you would have received from them acts of
kindness, but having taught them the lesson of slaughter, 
it is but your own deed that you are slain by their
hands.”

"True, very true,” said the robber chief, my fate
is well deserved ; but how sad is my lot, that I must
reap the full harvest of all my evil deeds in future
existences! Advise me, O holy sir, what I can do to
lighten the sins of my life which oppress me like a
great rock placed upon my breast, taking away the
breath of my lungs."

Said Panthaka: "Root out your sinful desires;
destroy all evil passions, and fill your soul with kindness 
toward all your fellow beings.”

The robber chief said: "I have done much evil
and no good. How can I extricate myself from the
net of sorrow which I have woven out of the evil desires of my own heart? 
My Karma will lead me to hell and I shall never be able to walk on the path of
salvation.”

Said the shramana: "Indeed your Karma will in
its future incarnations reap the seeds of evil that you
have sown. There is no escape for an evil doer from
the consequences of his own actions. But there is no cause for despair. 
The man who is converted and has rooted out the illusion of self with all its lusts and sinful 
desires will be a source of blessing to himself and
others.

"As an illustration I will tell you the story of the
great robber Kandata who died without repentance
and was reborn as a demon in hell where he suffered
for his evil deeds the most terrible agonies and pains.
He had been in hell several kalpas and was unable to
rise out of his wretched condition when Buddha appeared 
upon earth and attained to the blessed state of
enlightenment. At that memorable moment a ray of
light fell dawn into hell quickening all the demons
with life and hope, and the robber Kandata cried aloud:
'O blessed Buddha, have mercy upon me! I suffer
greatly and although I have done evil, 1 am anxious
to walk in the noble path of righteousness. But I cannot 
extricate myself from the net of sorrow. Help me,
O Lord; have mercy on me!’ Now it is the law of
Karma that evil deeds Jead to destruction, for absolute
evil is so bad that it cannot exist. Absolute evil involves 
impossibility of existence. But good deeds
lead to life. Thus there is a final end of every deed
that is done, but there is no end in the development
of good deeds. The least act of goodness bears fruits
containing new seeds of goodness and they continue
to grow, they nourish the soul in its weary transmigrations 
until it reaches the final deliverance from all
evil in Nirvâna. When Buddha, the Lord, heard the
prayer of the demon suffering in hell, he sent down a
spider on a cobweb and the spider said: ‘Take hold
of the web and climb up.’ When the spider had again
disappeared out of sight, Kandata made great efforts
to climb up and he succeeded. The web was so strong
that it held, and he ascended higher and higher. Suddenly 
he felt the thread trembling and shaking, for
behind him other fellow sufferers of his were beginning
to climb up. Kandata became frightened. He saw
the thinness of the web, and observed that it was elastic, 
for under the increased weight it stretched out;
yet it still seemed strong enough to carry him. Kandata 
had heretofore only looked up; he now looked
down and saw following close upon his heels, also
climbing up on the cobweb a numberless mob of the
denizens of hell. How can this thin thread bear the
weight of all, he thought to himself, and seized with
fear he shouted loudly: ‘Let go the cobweb. It is
mine!’ At once the cobweb broke and Kandata fell
back into hell.

"The illusion of self was still upon Kandata. He
did not know the miraculous power of a sincere longing 
to rise upwards and enter the noble path of righteousness. 
It is thin like a cobweb but it will carry
millions of people, and the more there are that climb
it, the easier will be the efforts of every one of them.
But as soon as in a man’s heart the idea arises: ‘This
is mine; let the bliss of righteousness be mine alone
and let no one else partake of it,’ the thread breaks,
and you fall back into your old condition of selfhood,
for selfhood is damnation and truth is bliss. What is
hell? It is nothing but egotism, and Nirvâna is a life
of righteousness.”

"Let me take hold of a spiderweb,” said the dying
robber chief, when the shramana had finished his
story, "and I shall pull myself up out of the depth of
hell.”

Mahâduta lay for a while quiet to collect his
thoughts. Then he continued :

"Listen, honorable sir, I will make a confession:
I was the servant of Pandu, the jeweller of Kaushambî,
but when he unjustly had me tortured I ran away and
became a chief of robbers. Some time ago when I 
heard through my spies that he was passing through
the mountains I succeeded in robbing him of a great
part of his wealth. Will you now go to him and tell
him that I have forgiven him from the bottom of my
heart the injury which he has unjustly inflicted upon
me, and ask him, too, to pardon me for having robbed
him. While I stayed with him his heart was as hard
as stone, and I learned to imitate the selfishness of
his character. I have heard that he has become benevolent 
and is now pointed out as an example of
goodness and justice. I do not wish to remain in his
debt. Therefore inform him that I have kept the gold
crown, which he wrought for the king, and all his
treasures, and have hidden them in a cave near by.
There were only two of the robbers under my command 
who knew of it, and both are now dead. Let
Pandu take a number of armed men and come to the
place and take back the property of which I have deprived him.”

Then Mahâduta described the situation of the cave
and died in the arms of Panthaka.

As soon as Panthaka, the young shramana, had
reached Kaushambî, he went to the jeweller and gave
him a full account of his recent adventure in the forest. 
And Pandu went with an escort of armed men
and secured the treasures which the robber-chief had
concealed in the cave; and they buried the robber-
chief and his slain comrades with all honors, and Panthaka 
spoke at the grave, discoursing on the words of
Buddha:

"By one’s self evil is done ; by one’s self one suffers.

"By one’s self evil is left undone ; by one’s self one
is purified.

"Purity and impurity belong to one’s self ; no one
can purify another.

"You yourself must make an effort.
The Buddhas are only preachers.

"Our karma,” the shramana said, "is not the work
of Ishvara, or Brahma, or Indra, or of any one of the
gods. Our karma is the product of our own actions,
My action is the womb that bears me ; it is the inheritance 
which devolves upon me ; it is the curse of my
misdeeds and the blessing of my righteousness. My
action is the resource by which alone I can work out
my salvation.”

Pandu carried all his treasures back to Kaushambî,
and, using with discretion the wealth thus unexpectedly
regained, he became richer and more powerful
than he had ever been before, and when he was dying
at an advanced age he had all his sons and daughters
and grandchildren gathered round him and said unto
them :

“ My dear children, do not blame others for your
lack of success. Seek the cause of your ills in yourself. 
Unless you are blinded by vanity you will find
it, and having found it you will see the way out of it.
The remedy of your ills, too, lies in yourself. Let
never your mental eye be covered by the veil of Mâyâ,
and remember the words which have proved a talisman in my life:

"He who hurts others injures himself.

"He who helps others advances his own interests.

"Let the illusion of self disappear.

“And you will naturally walk in the path of truth.”

P.C.