As an illustration I will tell you the story of the great robber Kandata who died without repentance and was reborn as a demon in hell where he suffered for his evil deeds the most terrible agonies and pains. He had been in hell several kalpas and was unable to rise out of his wretched condition when Buddha appeared upon earth and attained to the blessed state of enlightenment. At that memorable moment a ray of light fell dawn into hell quickening all the demons with fear and hope, and the robber Kandata cried aloud: 'O blessed Buddha, have mercy upon me! I suffer greatly and although I have done evil, I am anxious to walk in the noble path of righteousness. But I cannot extricate myself from the net of sorrow. Help me, O Lord; have mercy on me!' Now it is, the law of Karma that evil deeds lead to destruction, for absolute evil is so bad that it cannot exist. Absolute evil involves impossibility of existence. But good deeds lead to life. Thus there is a final end of every decd that is done, but there is no end in the development of good deeds. The least act of goodness bears fruits containing new seeds of goodness and they continue to grow, they nourish the soul in its weary transmigrations until it reaches the final deliverance from all evil in Nirvana. When Buddha, the Lord, heard the prayer of the demon suffering in hell, he sent down a spider on a cobweb and the spider said: 'Take hold of the web and climb up.' When the spider had again disappeared out of sight, Kandata made great efforts to climb up and he succeeded. The web was so strong that it held, and he ascended higher and higher. Suddenly he felt the thread trembling and shaking, for behind him other fellow sufferers of his were beginning to climb up. Kandata became frightened. He saw the thinness of the web, and observed that it was elastic, for under the increased weight it stretched out; yet it still seemed strong enough to carry him. Kandata had heretofore only looked up; he now looked down and saw following close upon his heels, also climbing up on the cobweb a numberless mob of the denizens of hell. How can this thin thread bear the weight of all, he thought to himself, and seized with fear he shouted loudly: 'Let go the cobweb. It is mine!' At once the cobweb broke and Kandata fell back into hell. The illusion of self was still upon Kandata. He did not know the miraculous power of a sincere longing to rise upwards and enter the noble path of righteousness. It is thin like a cobweb but it will carry millions of people, and the more there are that climb it, the easier will be the efforts of every one of them. But as soon as in a man's heart the idea arises; 'This is mine; let the bliss of righteousness be mine alone and let no one else partake of it,' the thread breaks, and you fall back into your old condition of selfhood, for selfhood is damnation and truth is bliss. What is hell? It is nothing but egotism, and Nirvana is a life of righteousness." "Let me take hold of a spiderweb," said the dying robber chief, when the shramana had finished his story, "and I shall pull myself up out of the depth of hell." 