Pandou, a rich jeweller of the Brahmanistic caste, accompanied by his domestic, set out on a journey to Benares. On the way he met a monk of venerable aspect, going on foot in the same direction, and invited him to take a seat in his vehicle. "I thank you for your goodness," said the monk, "for I am indeed very much fatigued. However, as I possess nothing and can pay you nothing in return, I will offer you, in case you should need them, some spiritual treasures which I have acquired in following the precepts of Sakya-Muni, the Blessed Buddha, Grand Master of Humanity!" They therefore journeyed together, and Pandou listened with pleasure to the wise words of Narada the Monk. An hour thus went by, and, arrived at a point where the road was overflowed with water, they perceived a wagon belonging to a peasant, which a broken wheel had caused to turn on its side, thus completely obstructing the passage-way. Devala, the proprietor of the charrette was en route to Benares to sell a load of rice, and he had hurried on in order to arrive there before day-dawn. Should he be retarded a day the buyers would have made their purchases and have departed. The jeweller, seeing that he could not continue his voyage if the obstacle was not removed, became angry and ordered his slave Madagouta to remove the wagon. The peasant resisted because it was so near the ditch that he feared the attempt would cause it to topple over. But the Brahmin would not listen, and ordered Madagouta to execute his commands. The slave, who was possessed of Herculean strength, and besides found pleasure in molesting the weak, threw the wagon into the ditch before the monk had time to interfere. When Pandou had passed the point, and was about to continue his journey, the monk quietly left the vehicle and said: "Excuse me, sir, for leaving you; I thank you for having been so good as to permit me to travel in your company during the last hour. I was greatly fatigued, but at present, thanks to your courtesy, I am rested. Besides, having recognized in this peasant the incarnation of one of your ancestors, I cannot better recompense you for your kindness than by succoring him in his misfortune." The Brahmin looked with astonishment at the monk. "You say that this peasant is the incarnation of one of my ancestors? It is impossible!" "You do not know," said the monk, "the many ties which unite us to the destiny of this peasant. One cannot expect, it is true, a blind man to see; therefore, I pity you only because in inflicting these wounds you harm yourself, and I will try to prevent you from so doing." Notwithstanding the great kindness with which the monk spoke, the rich merchant felt the reproach, and because he was not accustomed to be addressed in this manner, he ordered the driver to continue his journey without further parley. The monk approached Devala, saluted him, and commenced to aid him to repair the wagon and gather up the rice. The work advanced so rapidly that Devala could not help thinking thus: "This monk must be a saint; I should say that invisible spirits are aiding in this. What if I should ask him why the proud Brahmin treated me in such a rude manner?" "My good sir," said he, "can you tell me why I have been submitted to such an injustice on the part of a man to whom I have never done any wrong?" "Dear friend," replied the monk, "you have not submitted to any injustice ; this is but a return to you, in your present existence of that which you did to this Brahmin in your past life. And I do not deceive myself in saying that to-day you would do to the Brahmin that which he has done to you, if you were in his place, and if you had a slave as strong as his." 