Years passed on and Pandu's vihara at Kaushambi became a place in which wise shramanas used to stay and it was renowned as a centre of enlightenment for the people of the town. At that time the king of a neighboring country had heard of the beauty of Pandu's jewelry, and he sent his treasurer to order a royal diadem wrought in pure gold and set with the most precious stones of India. When Pandu had finished the work, he started for the residence of the king, and as he expected to transact other profitable business, took with him a great store of gold pieces. The caravan carrying his goods was protected by a strong escort of armed men, but when they reached the mountains they were attacked by a band of robbers lead by Mahaduta, who beat them and took away all the jewelry and the gold, and Pandu escaped with great difficulty. This misfortune was a blow to Pandu's prosperity, and as he suffered some other severe losses, his wealth was much reduced. Pandu was much distressed, but he bore his misfortunes without complaint, thinking to himself: "I have deserved these losses for the sins committed in my past existence. In my younger years I was very hard on other people; when I now reap the harvest of my evil deeds I have no cause for complaint." As he had grown in kindliness toward all beings, his misfortunes only served to purify his heart; and his chief regret, when thinking of his reduced means, was that he had become unable to do good and to help his friends in the vihara to spread the truths of religion. Again years passed on and it happened that Panthaka, a young shramana and a disciple of Narada, was travelling through the mountains of Kaushambi, and he fell among the robbers in the mountains. As he had nothing in his possession, the robber-chief beat him severely and let him go. On the next morning Panthaka, while pursuing his way through the woods, heard a noise as of quarrelling and fighting men, and going to the place he saw a number of robbers, all of them in a great rage, and in their midst stood Mahaduta, their chief; and the chief was desperately fighting them, like a lion surrounded by hounds, and he slew several of his aggressors with formidable blows, but there were too many against one! At last he succumbed and fell to the ground as if dead, covered with fatal wounds. As soon as the robbers had left the place the young shramana approached to see whether he could be of any assistance to the wounded men, He found that all the robbers were dead, and there was only a little life left in the chief, He at once went down to the little brooklet which was murmoring near by, fetched fresh water in his bowl and brought it to the dying man. Mahaduta opened his eyes and, gnashing his teeth, said: "Where are those ungrateful dogs whom I have led to victory and success? Without me as their chief they will soon perish like jackals hunted down by skillful hunters." "Do not think of your comrades, the companions of your sinful life," said Panthaka, "but think of your soul and accept in the last moment the chance of salvation that is offered you. Here is water to drink, and let me dress your wounds; perhaps I may save your life." "Alas! alas!" replied Mahaduta, "are you not the man whom I beat but yesterday and now you come to my assistance, to assuage my pain? You bring me fresh water to quench my thirst, and try to save my life! It is useless, honorable sir, I am a doomed man. The churls have wounded me unto death - the ungrateful cowards! They have dealt me the blows which I taught them." "You reap what you have sown;" continued the shramana, "had you taught your comrades acts of kindness, you would have received from them acts of kindness, but having taught them the lesson of slaughter, it is but your own deed that you are slain by their hands." "True, very true," said the robber chief, my fate is well deserved; but how sad is my lot, that I must reap the full harvest of all my evil deeds in future existences! Advise me, O holy sir, what I can do to lighten the sins of my life which oppress me like a great rock placed upon my breast, taking away the breath of my lungs." Said Panthaka: "Root out your sinful desires; destroy all evil passions, and fill your soul with kindness toward all your fellow beings." The robber chief said: "I have done much evil and no good. How can I extricate myself from the net of sorrow which I have woven out of the evil desires of my own heart? My Karma will lead me to hell and I shall never be able to walk on the path of salvation." Said the shramana: "Indeed your Karma will in its future incarnations reap the seeds of evil that you have sown. There is no escape for an evil doer from the consequences of his own actions. But there is no cause for despair. The man who is converted and has rooted out the illusion of self with all its lusts and sinful desires will be a source of blessing to himself and others. 