The rice was loaded and both travelled on to Varanasi, when all of a sudden the horse jumped aside. "A snake, a snake!" shouted the farmer. But the shramana looked closely at the object at which the horse shuddered, jumped out of the cart and saw that it was a purse full of gold, and the idea struck him: 'No one else but the wealthy jeweller can have lost this purse." He took the purse and handing it to the farmer said: 'Take this purse and when you come to Varanasi drive up to the inn which I shall point out to you; ask for Pandu, the Brahman, and deliver the purse. He will excuse himself for the rudeness with which he treated you, but tell him that you have forgiven him and wish him success in all his undertakings. For, let me tell you, the more successful he is, the better you will prosper; your fate depends in many respects upon his fate. Should the jeweller demand any explanation, send him to the vildra where he shall find me ready to assist him with advice in case he may feel the need of it." Pandu in the meantime arrived at Varanasi and met Mallika, his business-friend, a rich banker, "I am a ruined man," said Mallika, "and can do no business with you, unless I can buy a cart of the best rice for the king's table. There is a rival banker in Varanasi who learning that I had made a contract with the royal treasurer to deliver the rice to-morrow morning, and being desirous to bring about my destruction, has bought up all the rice in Varanasi, the royal treasurer must have received a bribe, for he will not release me from my contract and to-morrow I shall be a ruined man unless Krishna will send an angel from heaven to help me." While Mallika was still lamenting the poverty to which his rival would reduce him, Pandu missed his purse. Searching his carriage without being able to find it, he suspected his slave Mahaduta; and calling the police accused him of theft, and had him bound and cruelly tortured to extort a confession. The slave in his agonies cried: "I am innocent, let me go, for I cannot stand this pain; I am quite innocent at least of this crime, and suffer now for other sins. O, that I could beg the farmer's pardon whom, far the sake of my master, I wronged without any cause! This torture, I believe, is a punishment for my rudeness." While the police officer was still applying the lash to the back of the slave, the farmer arrived at the inn, and, to the great astonishment of all concerned, delivered the purse. The slave was at once released from the hands of his torturer. But being dissatisfied with his master, he secretly left and joined a band of robbers in the mountains, who made him their chief on account of his great strength and courage. When Mallika heard that the farmer had the best rice to sell, fit for delivery to the royal table, he bought at once the whole car-load for triple the price that the farmer had ever received, and Pandu, glad at heart to have his money restored, hastened at once to the vihara to receive further explanations from Narada, the shramana. Narada said: "I might give thee an explanation, but knowing that thou art unable to understand a spiritual truth, I prefer to remain silent. However, I shall give thee some advice: Treat every man whom thou meetest as thy own self; serve him as thou wouldst demand to be served thyself; for thus thou shalt sow a sowing of good deeds, the rich harvest of which thou wilt not fail to reap." "Give me, O shramana, the explanation," said the jeweller, "and I shall thereby be better able to follow your advice." The shramana said: 'Listen then, I will give you the key to the mystery. If you do not understand it, have faith in what I say. Self is an illusion, and he whose mind is bent upon following self, follows an ignis fatuus which leads him into the quagmire of sin. The illusion of self is the veil of Maya that blinds your eyes and prevents you from recognising the close relations that obtain between yourself and your fellows, and from tracing the identity of your self in the souls of other beings. Ignorance is the source of sin. There are few who know the truth. Let this motto be your talisman: 'He who hurts others injures himself. He who helps others advances his own interests. Let the delusion of self disappear from your mind. And you will naturally walk in the path of truth.' "To him whose vision is dimmed by the veil of Maya, the spiritual world appears to be cut up into innumerable selves. Thus he will be puzzled in many ways concerning the transmigration of soul-life, and will be incapable of understanding the import of an all-comprehensive kindness toward all living beings." The jeweller replied: 'Your words, O venerable sir, have a deep significance and I shall bear them in mind. I extended a small kindness which caused me no expense whatever to a poor shramana on my way to Varanasi, and lo! how propitious has been the result! I am deeply in your debt, for without you I should not only have lost my purse, but would have been prevented from doing business in Varanasi which greatly increased my wealth, while if it had been left undone it might have reduced me to a state of wretched poverty. In addition, your thoughtfulness and the arrival of the farmer's rice-cart preserved the prosperity of my friend Mallika, the banker. If all men saw the truth of your maxims, how much better the world would be, how greatly evils would be lessened, and public welfare enhanced! As I am anxious to let the truth of buddha be understood, I shall found a vihara at my native place, Kaushambi, and invite you to visit me so that I may dedicate the place to the brotherhood of Buddha's disciples." 