For example, I will recount to you the story of a celebrated brigand, Kandata, who died impenitent, and who was born again a demon in hell, where he endured the most horrible sufferings. He had been there for many years, unable to escape from his unhappy fate, when Buddha appeared upon the earth. At that memorable period, a ray of light penetrated as far as hell, and created hope in the breast of all the demons. 'O blessed Buddha, have pity upon me!' cried the brigand Kandata. 'I suffer horribly, and though I have committed evil I desire to walk now in the path of justice. But I cannot deliver myself from the net of pain which holds me. Aid me, Master, have pity upon me!' The law of Karma reads that bad actions lead to destruction. When Buddha heard the prayer of the demon suffering in hell he sent to him a spider upon his web, and the spider said to him: 'Take hold of my web and come out of hell.' When the spider had disappeared, Kandata seized the thread and commenced to climb. The thread was solid and did not break, so that the demon climbed higher and higher. Suddenly he felt the thread commence to tremble and swing. It was because other wretched demons were climbing behind him. Kandata was much frightened. He saw how thin was the thread, and he perceived that it grew still thinner by reason of the increased weight. However, Kandata held on. Up to that time he had only looked upwards; now he looked below and saw an innumerable crowd of the inhabitants of hell, who followed him. 'How may a thread so thin support the weight of all these people?' thought he, and frightened he cried out, 'Let go the thread, it is mine." "Suddenly the thread broke and Kandata fell backwards into hell. The erroneous sentiment of individuality was still alive in him. He did not know what marvellous force a sincere tendency has to mount upwards and to walk in the way of justice. That tendency is as light as a spider's thread, but it can hold up millions of men; and the more it holds, the lighter it will appear. But just as soon as there is born in the heart of man the thought that the thread as his own, that the blessing of justice belongs to him alone, and that no one may share it with him, the thread breaks, and man falls backward into his former position of isolated individuality. Now, isolation is a malediction and union is a benediction. What is hell? It is nothing else than the love of self, whilst Nirvana is life in common." "Cause me then to seize the spider's thread," said the dying Madagouta, when the monk had finished his recital. 
