Mahaduta lay for a while quiet to collect his thoughts. Then he continued: "Listen, honorable sir, I will make a confession: I was the servant of Pandu, the jeweller of Kaushambi, but when he unjustly had me tortured I ran away and became a chief of robbers. heard through my spies that he was passing through the mountains I succeeded in robbing him of a great part of his wealth. Will you now go to him and tell him that I have forgiven him from the bottom of my heart the injury which he has unjustly inflicted upon me, and ask him, too, to pardon me for having robbed him. While I stayed with him his heart was as hard as stone, and I learned to imitate the selfishness of his character. I have heard that he has become benevolent and is now pointed out as an example of goodness and justice. I do not wish to remain in his debt. Therefore inform him that I have kept the gold crown, which he wrought for the king, and all his treasures, and have hidden them in a cave near by. There were only two of the robbers under my command who knew of it, and both are now dead. Let Pandu take a number of armed men and come to the place and take back the property of which I have deprived him." Then Mahaduta described the situation of the cave and died in the arms of Panthaka. As soon as Panthaka, the young shramana, had reached Kaushambi, he went to the jeweller and gave him a full account of his recent adventure in the forest. And Pandu went with an escort of armed men and secured the treasures which the robber-chief had concealed in the cave; and they buried the robber-chief and his slain comrades with all honors, and Panthaka spoke at the grave, discoursing on the words of Buddha: "By one's self evil is done; by one's self one suffers. By one's self evil is left undone; by one's self one is purified. Purity and impurity belong to one's self; no one can purify another. You yourself must make an effort. The Buddhas are only preachers." "Our karma," the shramana said, "is not the work of Ishvara, or Brahma, or Indra, or of any one of the gods. Our karma is the product of our own actions. My action is the womb that bears me; it is the inheritance which devolves upon me ; it is the curse of my misdeeds and the blessing of my righteousness. My action is the resource by which alone I can work out my salvation." Pandu carried all his treasures back to Kaushambi, and, using with discretion the wealth thus unexpectedly regained, he became richer and more powerful than he had ever been before, and when he was dying at an advanced age he had all his sons and daughters and grandchildren gathered round him and said unto them : " My dear children, do not blame others for your lack of success. Seek the cause of your ills in yourself. Unless you are blinded by vanity you will find it, and having found it you will see the way out of it. The remedy of your ills, too, lies in yourself. Let never your mental eye be covered by the veil of Maya, and remember the words which have proved a talisman in my life: "He who hurts others injures himself. He who helps others advances his own interests. Let the illusion of self disappear. And you will naturally walk in the path of truth."